It's time for a notorious topic,
understanding closures.
Closures is a JavaScript topic that's
absolutely vital to understand
if you're going to advance at all in
understanding and writing the language.
However, it's also notoriously difficult
to understand, but you're ready.
At this point, I hope that you'll see that
all the time we've taken to understand
how things work under the hood,
to understand first class functions.
To understanding the execution stack and
the execution context.
That all of those things
right now are about to
pay off in understanding
closures in JavaScript.
To start with,
we're going to write a bit of code
that will show the power of closures.
And then we'll examine it under the hood
to understand what's really going on.
I'm gonna go ahead and
create my good old greet function.
But this time I'm going to accept a
parameter of what greeting I want to say.
It could be hi or hello or
howdy or hola or whatever.
And instead of doing the work
inside this function,
I'm going to return a function
using a function expression.
And I'm going to take advantage of scope,
of the scope chain,
to include what to say.
Space, and then a name.
Take a good look at this.
I have a function that returns a function.
So, when I call greet, when I invoke it,
I'll get a value back, that instead of a
string or a number or something like that,
I'm going to get a function
that I can then invoke again.
Make sense?
Because functions are objects I
can just return it as a value.
That makes for some interesting syntax.
For example, I can say greet,
I wanna say hi.
Now this returns a function.
So how do I invoke the function?
I invoke it and say Tony.
Looks a little weird right.
But you're invoking a function
that returns a function.
So then I can invoke
the function that was returned.
So if I run this, and
open up my console, Hi Tony.
All right, so that makes sense.
And yet,
something unusual is already happening.
To understand just how unusual
it is to make it a bit clearer,
let's do this a bit differently.
Let's set a variable equal to
the result of the function.
So now sayHi will be a function,
the function that was
returned by calling greet.
When I call sayHi, and
if I run this, it still works.
Let's stop and
think about this for a minute.
How does the sayHi function still
know the whattosay variable?
Because the whattosay variable was created
here when this greet function was called,
and then that function is done, it's over.
It completed its execution.
It's popped off the execution stack.
And yet when I call say high,
when I invoke it, still has
the proper value of whattosay.
See that?
How is that possible?
It's possible because of closures.
Let's take a look at what's happening
under the hood when this code is executed.
I have my code.
And remember this seems unusual
because the greet function ends.
And when I invoke the function
that is returned,
it seems like that greet function
is still hanging around somehow,
because the whattosay
variable is still there.
So what's happening?
Well, when this code starts,
we have our Global Execution Context.
When I hit this line sayHi = greet,
it invokes the greet
function, the new execution
context is created.
And that variable that's passed to it,
whattosay,
is sitting in its variable environment.
It returns a new function object.
It creates a function on the fly,
and returns it.
And that's it.
So after that return, the greet execution
context is popped off the stack.
It's gone.
But here's a question.
We said every execution context
has this space in memory,
where the variables and
functions created inside of it live.
What happens to that memory space
when the execution context goes away?
Well under normal circumstances,
the JavaScript
engine would eventually clear it out with
a process called garbage collection.
But at the moment that
execution context finishes,
that memory space is still there.
It's still hanging around.
The execution context may be gone,
but it's just sitting
there somewhere in memory.
All right, now we move on and we're inside
the global execution context again.
And then we invoke the function
that sayHi is pointing at.
It's an anonymous function,
because we didn't give our function
a name when we returned it.
And then that creates
a new execution context.
And I've passed the name variable, Tony.
So that will end up in its memory.
But when I hit this line, console.log.
When its code is invoked,
and JavaScript engine sees
the whattosay variable,
what does the JavaScript engine do?
Well it goes up the scope chain.
We've learned this.
There's an outer lexical
environment reference.
In other words it goes to the next point
outside where the function was created to
look for that variable, since it couldn't
find it inside the function itself.
And even though the execution context
of that function greet is gone,
was popped off the stack,
the sayHi execution
context still has a reference
to the variables, to the memory
space of its outer environment.
In other words,
even though the greet function ended,
it finished,
any functions created inside of it
when they are called will still have a
reference to that greet function's memory.
To what was in its memory,
its execution context memory space.
Think about this for a second.
Greet is gone,
the execution context is gone.
But what's in memory for that execution
context isn't and the JavaScript
engine makes sure that my function can
still go down the scope chain and find it.
Even though it's not even on
the execution stack anymore.
And this way we say that the execution
context has closed in its outer variables,
the variables that it would
normally have reference to anyway.
Even though those execution
contexts are gone.
And so this phenomenon,
of it closing in all the variables
that it's supposed to have access to,
is called a closure.
Make sense?
It isn't something, then, that you create,
that you type,
that you tell the JavaScript engine to do.
Closures are simply a feature of
the JavaScript programming language.
They just happen.
It doesn't matter when
we invoke a function.
We don't have to worry if its outer
environments are still running.
The JavaScript engine will always make
sure that whatever function I'm running,
that it will have access to the variables
that it's supposed to have access to.
That its scope is intact.
Make sense?
This is a feature of the language that's
extraordinarily important and powerful.
We rely on it a lot.
It allows us to make some really
interesting coding patterns.
And understanding what's
happening under the hood
helps us to understand closures
aren't all that complicated.
They're just a feature to make sure that,
when you run a function,
it works the way it's supposed to; that
it has access to those outer variables.
It doesn't matter whether the outer
functions have finished running or not.
So when you say, oh I create a closure.
Well sort of.
You'll read that sometimes,
I create a closure.
The JavaScript engine creates the closure.
We're just taking advantage of it.
All right, so let's look at
what may be the classic example
of how closures can end up in surprising
results when you look at code.
But, if you understand what's happening
under the hood it may not be so
surprising after all.